## Public Health Measure: Framingham global risk scale versus PROCAM for measuring the risk of Cardiovascular disease

### Ayda Ahmadi, Amaal Alruwaily, Niloofar Fouladi Nashta, Christopher Park, Ying (Shelly) Qi

December 13, 2018

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death in the United States (US) and is responsible for approximately 1 in 4 deaths. 1 The major risk factors for CVD include age, sex, smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, high LDL-C, low HDL-C, and diabetes. 2 Additional risk factors include obesity and family history of premature coronary heart disease (CHD). 2 In order to prevent further incidence of CVD, it is important to identify the population who may be at high-risk. Throughout the years, numerous multivariable risk assessments tools have been created and recommended for clinical use to implement proper prevention strategies. This analysis compares the effectiveness of two multivariable risk assessment tools in a male National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) sample: the Framingham 10-year CVD risk score (FRS) versus the Prospective Cardiovascular Münster Study (PROCAM) score.

### Framingham Risk Score (FRS)
The FRS model was first developed to predict CHD using a Framingham Heart Study sample that followed participants from the original and offspring cohorts for 12 years. This model included blood pressure (BP), cholesterol, and LDL-C categories as defined by the Joint National Committee (JNC-V) and National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) ATP II. The original multivariate analysis evaluated the utility and accuracy of these variables in predicting CHD. 2 Family history for heart disease, physical activity, and obesity were not included in the original analysis. In 2008, D’Agostino et al. created a model to predict 10-year CVD risk based on the original FRS model. The complete updated model included age, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, systolic blood BP, antihypertensive medication use, current smoking status, and diabetes status. Use of antihypertensive medication was adjusted by modifying the impact of the participant’s systolic blood pressure. The updated FRS used the same Framingham sample and used participants without CVD who were 30 to 74 years of age with non-missing data for the covariates. 3 The updated model demonstrates good discrimination and calibration for predicting CVD and for predicting risk of the individual components of the model. 3 The C statistic for general CVD risk prediction models ranged from 0.76 to 0.79. 3 Additionally, this function performed better than the original Framingham risk function for predicting CVD risk, likely due to using continuous variables instead of categorical variables. 

### PROCAM
The PROCAM scoring system is a simple and precise scoring scheme for predicting the global 10-year risk of acute coronary heart events. 4 The scale was based off of a cohort study which included 5,389 males who were recruited prior to 1985 and were aged 35 to 65 years. 4 Of the 5,389 men, 325 developed major coronary events within the 10-year period after they were recruited in the study. 4 The PROCAM scoring system includes eight risk factors for CHD prediction: age; smoking; LDL cholesterol; HDL cholesterol; triglycerides; systolic BP; diabetes; and family history of CHD. 4 The CVD risk was classified as low for patients with scores <10% risk of an acute coronary event in the next 10 years, medium for scores 10% to 20%, and high for scores > 20%. 4 The accuracy of PROCAM was assessed in the original study by comparing the calculated risk scores with the risk calculated for each study participant using a Cox risk algorithm. 4 The PROCAM scoring scheme and PROCAM cox model showed fair agreement, since the area under the curve for each model (receiver-operating characteristics or ROC) was reported as 82.4% and 82.9%, respectively. 4 

### FRS vs. PROCAM
Several studies have compared FRS with PROCAM among various populations. A study conducted on a male population with the presence and absence of diabetes reported an underestimation of the CHD risk when calculated by PROCAM compared to those at low risk identified by FRS; additionally, the study reported an overestimation of CHD risk for those that were identified as high risk by FRS.5 In this study, the proportion of individuals identified as low and high risk by both FRS and PROCAM were similar.5

In a Slovenian study among 83 HIV-infected men, PROCAM and FRS reported a similar proportion of patients with low 10-year risk of a coronary heart event (88.0% and 72.3%, respectively).6 The observed agreement between the two scales was reported as 77.1% (Kappa: 0.329; p-value <0.0001).6 In addition, agreement was observed between the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis and the result of CHD risk calculated by PROCAM and FRS, showing 56.6% and 60.2% agreement, respectively.6 

## Methods
### Data Source and Study Design
This analysis used data from NHANES (2011-2016). NHANES is a nationally representative, cross-sectional survey conducted every two-years by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Data to assess the health and nutritional status of the US population are collected from a representative sample of non-institutionalized American citizens through personal interviews, physical examinations, laboratory tests, nutritional assessments, and DNA repositories. Interviews are self-reported and conducted by trained interviewers or a computer-assisted personal interval (CAPI) system.7

Data from three cycles were merged to obtain the analytic sample population. Participants provided information on systolic blood pressure, serum cholesterol levels, and fasting blood glucose in medical examination centers (MEC) or in facilities associated with the NHANES. Information regarding diabetes, age, smoking status, and familial history were collected during self-reported interviews. For the scope of our study, males between the age of 30- to 80-years old were included (n=14,124). NHANES and all translations were approved by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Research Ethics Review Board (ERB). All participants provided informed consent.7

### Measurement of CVD
CVD was measured using health questionnaire data on CVD conditions available through NHANES. The following conditions were merged to provide a CVD measurement: CHD, congestive heart failure (CHF), stroke, angina, myocardial infarction (MI), and hypertension (HTN). Data were obtained through self-reported responses to the following questions, “Has a doctor or other health professional ever told you that you had (CHD, CHF, Stroke, Angina, MI, or HTN)?”. CVD was dichotomized as “Yes, if ever had a CVD condition” and “Never”.

### CVD Risk Factors of FRS and PROCAM
The ages between 30- to 80- years old were stratified into 5-year intervals for FRS, while ages between 35- to 65- years old were used for PROCAM. HDL-C levels were categorized as <35 mg/dL, 35-44 mg/dL, 45-49 mg/dL, 50-59 mg/dL, and ≥60 mg/dL; LDL-C were categorized as <100 mg/dL, 100-129 mg/dL, 130-159 mg/dL, 160-189 mg/dL, and ≥190 mg/dL; triglycerides were categorized as <100 mg/dL, 100-149 mg/dL, 150-199 mg/dL, and ≥200 mg/dL; total cholesterol levels were categorized as <160 mg/dL, 160-199 mg/dL, 200-239 mg/dL, 240-279 mg/dL, and ≥280 mg/dL. Systolic blood pressure was averaged from 2nd and 3rd measurements and then stratified by taking treatment for antihypertensive medication for FRS, while PROCAM did not stratify by treatment. Systolic blood pressure was categorized as <120 mmHg, 120 to 129 mmHg, 130 to 139 mmHg, 140 to 159 mmHg, and ≥160 mmHg. Current smoking status were determined if participants reported to have smoked at least 100 cigarettes within their lifetime and was currently a smoker. For FRS, fasting blood glucose levels, levels above or equal to 126 mg/dL, or self-reported use of hypoglycemic agents were considered diabetic; levels less than 126 mg/dL were considered non-diabetic. For PROCAM, diabetes status and familial history of myocardial infarction were determined by self-report questionnaire.3,4

### General Risk Scoring System for FRS and PROCAM
FRS and PROCAM point systems were used as a reference to convert equated points for participants into CVD risk percentages. Intervals were stratified as “Low” CVD risk for <10%, “Moderate” CVD risk for 10-19%, and “High” CVD risk for >20%.3,4 

### Statistical Analysis
Chi-square tests were used for bivariate analyses between CVD and sociodemographic and clinical variables. Internal consistency of FRS and PROCAM were measured by calculating Cronbach’s alpha. κ statistics were conducted to analyze Cohen’s kappa and overall percent agreement between results of FRS and PROCAM measuring CVD risk in non-CVD populations; this was performed to observe whether both scales would provide comparable results.  To determine criterion validity of each scale, odds ratios (OR) of the presence of CVD for each item was analyzed using logistic regression for FRS and PROCAM. Construct validity was assessed by conducting pair-wise correlation between inter-scale items to observe its underlying relationship with CVD.

## Results
The Cronbach’s alpha for FRS and PROCAM were 0.318 and 0.22, respectively. These results indicate that FRS provides higher internal consistency compared to PROCAM. Criterion validity of FRS and PROCAM was assessed by comparing the odds ratio (OR) of each category for each item (Table 2). For FRS, CVD risk significantly increased with age; the odds of having CVD was 15.23 (12.80-18.12) times higher in participants 75-years or older compared to those aged 30-34 years. Similarly, diabetes and high untreated systolic BP presented higher odds when compared to their lowest categories (4.96 (4.37- 5.62) and 77.66 (64.69- 93.22), respectively). Smoking status and HDL-C did not have a significant impact on OR. In contrast, the odds of having CVD using PROCAM was highest among males who were aged 60 to 65 years, had high systolic BP, and had self-reported diabetes, compared to their reference groups (OR are 7.87, 25.56, and 12.55, respectively). Triglyceride levels, smoking status, history of MI, HDL-C and LDL-C did not indicate significantly high OR of having CVD compared to their respective reference group. Overall comparison of the items in FRS and PROCAM indicated that FRS had higher overall ORs of having CVD than PROCAM. Therefore FRS have higher criterion validity compare to PROCAM due to more number of items having high OR of CVD. 
Construct validity for FRS and PROCAM was verified by pairwise correlation (Table 3 & Table 4, respectively). All items within FRS were significantly associated with CVD except for systolic BP. Age, untreated systolic BP, smoking status, total cholesterol level, and fasting blood glucose indicated a positive correlation with CVD. HDL-C presented a negative correlation with CVD, which is coherent with the biological nature of its association with CVD. All items within PROCAM were found to be significant with CVD. Age, HDL-C, triglyceride, smoking status, self-reported diabetes, familial history of MI, and systolic BP were indicated to have a positive correlation with CVD. LDL-C had a negative correlation with CVD, which is inconsistent with prior findings since LDL-C is known to be a deleterious factor for CVD. To evaluate absolute agreement between the FRS and PROCAM results, percent overall agreement and Cohen's kappa was calculated, with result of 0.74 and 0.13, respectively. 

## Discussion 
In our study, FRS with PROCAM were compared using NHANES to assess how the scales predict the risk of developing CVD. Cohen’s kappa was used to measure the reliability of CVD diagnosis by measuring the agreement between the two scales; the overall agreement was 74% and Cohen’s kappa was 13%. This result can be justified by the fact that PROCAM presented low reliability and validity and further confirmed by the poor performance of PROCAM in measuring CVD. Our observed agreement was similar to the results from the Pirs et al. study (77%); however, the Cohen’s kappa obtained in that study was higher (33%).6 Our low Cohen’s kappa suggests that FRS had higher validity and reliability compared to PROCAM for our NHANES population; this may be due to a few factors. First, individuals over 65 have a higher risk of CVD.1 For FRS, individuals over 65 are grouped into three categories which are weighted differently: 65 - 69 years; 70 - 74 years; and 75 - 80 years. On the other hand, PROCAM only categorizes those over 60 years as 60 - 65 years, which is a limitation of the measurement. Thus, given the greater number of age groups included in the model, FRS may predict CVD more accurately. 
Secondly, PROCAM does not account for hypertension medication as a criterion for hypertension; this results in healthy participants with low BP and medicated hypertensive participants having similar scores. Additionally, in PROCAM, diabetes diagnosis is based on self-report. This could lead to misclassification, since participants may not be honest about their diagnosis, or may not know they are diabetic. Lastly, FRS may be a better predictor of CVD in our sample because it was originally tested among a US population, whereas PROCAM was tested among European populations. Overall, the results from the pairwise correlation of both scales suggest that FRS presents higher construct validity than PROCAM. In conjunction with both results of validity and reliability analyses, FRS is a more accurate scale than PROCAM.

## Limitations
The results of the analysis should be interpreted in the context of the study limitations. First, since PROCAM was originally tested among males, females were not included in our analysis in order to make PROCAM and FRS comparable. Additionally, NHANES only obtained fasting blood glucose from those who participated in the morning. This may introduce selection bias, since we do not have fasting blood glucose levels for those who participated in the afternoon or evening. Both of these limitations may reduce the generalizability of our results. Moreover, the criteria used to create the CVD variable might not be enough to detect CVD in the sample. Also, all the participants taking treatment for antihypertensive in our sample were diagnosed as having CVD, therefore we could not obtain OR of those whose blood pressure was treated since all of them have CVD. Lastly, NHANES is a cross-sectional study, which makes it difficult to determine the validity of the scales.

## Conclusions
Overall, both measurements for predicting CVD risk are informative, but given the cross-sectional nature of NHANES, they are unable to accurately predict the outcome. In general,  FRS had better reliability and validity compared to PROCAM in our male NHANES population, which may be due to two reasons. First, PROCAM had some significant limitations in scoring the risk of the NHANES participants. Second, since NHANES is a US-based population, FRS was better at indicating CVD risk compared to PROCAM. In order to properly assess the validity and reliability of FRS versus PROCAM, analyses should be performed for a longitudinal study. 


### References
1.	CDC, NCHS. Underlying Cause of Death 1999-2013 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released 2015. Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999-2013, as compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program. Accessed Feb. 3, 2015.
2.	Wilson PWF, D’Agostino RB, Levy D, Belanger AM, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB. Prediction of Coronary Heart Disease Using Risk Factor Categories. CIRCULATION. 1998;(18):1837. http://proxy.library.nyu.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsbl&AN=RN043919581&site=eds-live. Accessed December 12, 2018.
3.	D Agostino RB, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, et al. General Cardiovascular Risk Profile for Use in Primary Care: The Framingham Heart Study. CIRCULATION. 2008;(6):743. http://proxy.library.nyu.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsbl&AN=RN224474773&site=eds-live. Accessed December 12, 2018.
4.	Assmann G, Cullen P, Schulte H. Simple Scoring Scheme for Calculating the Risk of Acute Coronary Events Based on the 10-Year Follow-Up of the. Circulation. 2002;105:310-315. doi:10.1161/hc0302.102575
5.	Game FL, Jones AF. Coronary heart disease risk assessment in diabetes mellitus - A comparison of PROCAM and Framingham risk assessment functions. Diabet Med. 2001;18(5):355-359. doi:10.1046/j.1464-5491.2001.00438.x
6.	Pirs M, Jug B, Eržen B, et al. Cardiovascular risk assessment in HIV-infected male patients: A comparison of Framingham, SCORE, PROCAM and DAD risk equations. Acta Dermatovenerologica Alpina, Pannonica Adriat. 2014;23(3):43-47. doi:10.15570/actaapa.2014.11
7.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Data. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015-2016 https://wwwn.cdc.gov/Nchs/Nhanes/2015-2016/DEMO_I.htm.
